22th May 2024
By Bertram Nicolai Hage - s224918
## Problem 1
#### Question 1.1
The decision-maker is the person referred to in the text as "you", the organizing the party.

The decisions that are to be made is what form of transportation to use: Biking, taking the 2A bus, or taking a ShareNow electric car. Each decision brings it's own cost.

The exogenous variables from the environment is the weather that, in this problem, will be considered as a binary variable being either sunny or rainy.

#### Question 1.2
|          | Sunny | Rainy |
| -------- | ----- | ----- |
| Bike     | 0     | 150   |
| Bus      | 54    | 114   |
| ShareNow | 77    | 95    |
In the above table the pay-off table is displayed. Here the "base" price for each option is summed with the cost of being late, given the outcome. 

Example:
Taking the bus and it raining:
$C=24DKK+15\cdot6DKK=54DKK$.

#### Question 1.3
By using the $Maximax$ strategy we will choose the decision that yields the lowest cost overall, regardless of the state of nature.

Looking at the payoff table from 1.2 this will be to take the bike.

Using the $Maximin$ strategy we seek to choose the decision that yields the lowest cost, given the worst case scenario for the state of nature, in our case this is if it will rain.

Looking at the payoff table from 1.2 this will be to take a ShareNow car.

#### Question 1.4
|          | Sunny | Rainy |
| -------- | ----- | ----- |
| Bike     | 0     | 55    |
| Bus      | 54    | 19    |
| ShareNow | 77    | 0     |
The above table shows the regret table for the system. Here, for each weather outcome, and in turn for each option we calculate the regret, that is, the extra cost by choosing the given option rather than the optimal option for that weather outcome.

By following the $Minimax$ strategy we choose the option that has the lowest maximum regret, which in this case is taking the bus. 

#### Question 1.5
The expected utility maximization EUM can be calculated by
$$
\max_x \mathbb{E}_\omega [U(x,\omega)]
$$
where $U$ is the utility, $\omega$ represents the stochastic variable of it raining or not, and $x$ represent the decision variable.

Since we want to minimize cost this is equivalent to 
$$
\min_x \mathbb{E}_\omega [C(x,\omega)].
$$

For a given value $p$ the $\mathbb{E}_\omega [C(x,\omega)]$ for each option, $x$, is
$Bike: 0\cdot p + 150\cdot(1-p)$
$Bus: 54\cdot p + 114\cdot(1-p)$
$C:77\cdot p+95\cdot(1-p)$

For $p=0.3$ we get 
$Bike: 0\cdot 0.3 + 150\cdot(1-0.3)=105$
$Bus: 54\cdot 0.3 + 114\cdot(1-0.3)=96$
$C:77\cdot 0.3+95\cdot(1-0.3)=89.6$

Thus, for $p=0.3$ the decision obtained with the EUM strategy will be to take a ShareNow.
## Problem 2
#### Question 2.1
This is a discrete time Markov chain.

A state is denoted by what is left of snacks at the end of the day. Let the state at time $t$ be denoted by $X_{t}$. We define the time steps between a given $t$ and $t+1$ as one day. We cannot have a state in the middel of the day. Thus $t\in 0\cap \mathbb{N}$ meaning that the Markov chain is a discrete time Markov chain.

#### Question 2.2
Let $P()d_i)$ denote the probability that the demand for snacks is $i$.

If we are at a state of 0 we will get 4 snacks delivered the next morning. Thus, going from state 0 to state 0 will require that the demand the next day is 4 or above.
$p_{00} = P(d_5)+P(d_4)=0.1+0.2=0.3$

If we are at a state of 0 we will get 4 snacks delivered the next morning. Thus, going from state 0 to state 2 will require that the demand the next day is exactly 2.
$p_{02}=P(d_2)=0.2$

If we are at a state of 2 we will get no snacks delivered the next morning. Thus, going from state 2 to state 0 will require that the demand the next day is 2 or above.
$p_{20}=P(d_2)+P(d_3)+P(d_4)+P(d_5)=0.2+0.2+0.2+0.1=0.7$
Unless we hit an inventory of 0 we will not get new snacks delivered. Thus, going from state 2 to state 4 in one time step is impossible.
$p_{24}=0$

$p_{02}$ represents ending the day with 0 snacks left and the next day selling snacks such that there are 2 remaining at the end of the day.

#### Question 2.3
Defining the 1-step probability matrix $P$ we can calculate the steady state probabilities $\pi$ as
$$A=P^\top-I$$
$$
A^*=\begin{bmatrix}&-&A&-&& \\
1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1
\end{bmatrix}
$$
$$
b=\begin{bmatrix}0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1\end{bmatrix}
$$
$$
\pi=\frac{A^*}{b^\top} \approx 
\begin{bmatrix}
0.493 \\
0.182 \\
0.149 \\
0.122 \\
0.055
\end{bmatrix}
$$
<!--
0.49293764087152525 0.1818181818181818 0.14876033057851237 0.12171299774605555 0.05477084898572502
-->
The vector is calculated using Julia code:
```julia
using LinearAlgebra

P = [
0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1;
0.9 0.1 0 0 0;
0.7 0.2 0.1 0 0;
0.5 0.2 0.2 0.1 0;
0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1;
]

A = P' - I
A = vcat(A, ones(size(A)[1])')
b = vcat(zeros(size(A)[1]-1), 1)
pi = A\b
```

#### Question 2.4
The case of $\mu_{00}$ that is the expected time to for the first time to return to state $0$ again after starting in state $0$ can be calculated as
$$
\mu_{00}=\frac{1}{\pi_0}\approx\frac{1}{0.493}\approx2.0286.
$$
Thus, the expected first passage time to go from no inventory, to no inventory again is a little over 2 days.

#### Question 2.5
The expected cost can be calculated by
$$
\sum_{j=0}^{5} \pi_jC(j).
$$
We need to adjust the cost according to the demand. For the case of state 0 a delivery will be neccesary, meaning a fixed cost of 100DKK. If the demand turns out to be 5 there will be one unit unsatisfied demand. If the state is 1 nothing will be delivered and a demand of between 2 and 5 will lead to unsatisfied demand of 1,2,3 and 4 units respectively. This logic follows for all the states. Thus:
$$
\begin{align}
\text{Expected cost}=& \\
&\pi_0\cdot 100DKK + P(d_5)\cdot 40DKK\\
+&\pi_1[P(d_2)+2\cdot P(d_3)+3\cdot P(d_4)+4\cdot P(d_5)]\cdot 40DKK \\
+&\pi_2[P(d_3)+2\cdot P(d_4)+3\cdot P(d_5)]\cdot 40DKK \\
+&\pi_3[P(d_4)+2\cdot P(d_5)]\cdot 40DKK \\
+&\pi_4P(d_5)\cdot 40DKK \\
\approx&72.45 DKK
\end{align}
$$

The expected costs of the inventory policy will be 72.45DKK pr day.

## Problem 3
#### Question 3.1
Based on the information given we have 
$\mu = 30$ (customers pr. hour)
$L_q=20$
$W=\frac{3.5}{60} \approx 0.058$ (time in hours)

Using Little's formulas we get:
$W = W_q+\frac{1}{\mu} \Leftrightarrow \frac{3.5}{60}=W_q+\frac{1}{30} \implies W_q = \frac{1.5}{30}$.
The average time spent in the queue is 1.5 minutes

$L_q=\lambda W_q\Leftrightarrow 20=\lambda\frac{ 1.5}{30}\implies \lambda=400$
There is an arrival rate of 400 customers per hour

$L=\lambda W = 400\frac{3.5}{60} \approx 23.34$
There is approximately a little over 23 customers in the system.
#### Question 3.2
In order to have a stable queueing system it needs to hold that $\lambda≤n_s\mu$, where $n_s$ is the number of servers. Thus
$$
400≤n_s\cdot 30\implies n_s≥13.34\implies n_s≥14.
$$
The system needs at least 14 servers to ensure a stable queueing system.

## Problem 4
#### Question 4.1
<!--
Applies to:
+ one shot possibility
+ uncertain demand but distribution is known
+ known marginal profit and loss
+ aim is to maximize expected utility
-->
This is a newsvendor problem since:
- There is a one shot possibility – the event is only taking place one time (24th of May).
- The demand in uncertain, however, we do know the distribution of the demand.
- The marginal profit and loss is known.
- We aim to maximize expected utility.

These are the characteristics of a newsvendor problem.

#### Question 4.2
**Underage**
Given the information, a shortage on chairs given the demand exceeding the number of chairs will force GP to pay vouchers of 1200DKK and 2000DKK for regular and fancy seats respectively. Thus
$$
\pi_u=\begin{cases}
1200DKK, \text{ for regular chairs} \\
2000DKK, \text{ for fancy chairs}
\end{cases}.
$$

**Overage**
GP is not able to re-sell the chairs in any ways. Thus, if buying too many GP will have to pay the full cost of the chairs, thus
$$
\pi_o=100DKK.
$$
#### Question 4.3
We want to solve an expected utility maximization problem for each chair type:
$$
\min_{x_r} \mathbb{E}(\pi_{u,r}\max(0,\omega_r-x_r)+\pi_o\max(0,x_r-\omega_r)),
$$
$$
\min_{x_f} \mathbb{E}(\pi_{u,f}\max(0,\omega_f-x_f)+\pi_o\max(0,x_f-\omega_f)),
$$
where $x_r,x_f$ is the number of regular and fancy chairs respectively, $\omega_r,\omega_f$ is the demand for regular and fancy chairs respectively, and $\pi_{u,r}, \pi_{u,f}$ is the underage for regular and fancy chairs respectively

The optimal solution for chair type $i$ $x_i^*$ is calculated by
$$
x_i^* = F^{-1}\left( \frac{\pi_{u,i}}{\pi_{u,i}+\pi_o} \right)
$$
For each chair type we get
<!-- 
92.47003759827548 118.49316067105265
-->
$$
x_r^*\approx92.47.
$$
$$
x_f^*\approx118.49.
$$
As the number of chairs need to be an integer we round to the nearest whole number. Thus the optimal number of regular chairs is 92 and the optimal number of fancy chairs is 118.

The calculation is performed using Julia by
```julia
using Distributions
dist_r = Normal(90, sqrt(3))
dist_f = Normal(115, sqrt(6))

pi_ur = 1200
pi_uf = 2000
pi_o = 100

x_r = quantile(dist_r, pi_ur/(pi_ur+pi_o))
x_f = quantile(dist_f, pi_ur/(pi_ur+pi_o))
```

#### Question 4.4
We denote the realization of $\omega_r$ as $\Omega_r$ and the realization of $\omega_f$ as $\Omega_f$.

We assume that the number of chairs ordered was the optimum calculated in 4.3, thus $X_r=92, X_f=118$.

The total cost of operating the chairs is 
$$
C=100DKK \cdot  (92+118) = 21,000DKK.
$$
Too few fancy chairs was ordered, as 120 was booked but only 118 was ordered. Thus GP will have to pay 2 of the vouchers for fancy chairs. Thus
$$
C_u = 2\cdot 2000DKK=4000DKK
$$
Thus the total cost is $25,000DKK$.

The revenue for selling tickets for the regular seats is
$$
900DKK \cdot  80 = 72,000DKK.
$$

The revenue for selling tickets for the fancy seats is
$$
1300DKK \cdot  120 = 156,000DKK.
$$
Thus the total revenue is $228,000DKK$.

Thus the total profit is $228,000DKK-25,000DKK=203,000DKK$.

## Problem 5

#### Question 5.1
The here-and-now decision is the number of cars to transport now buy oneself, $x_1$. This can maximum be 12.

The recourse decision is the number of cars to get transported by the subcontractor later on, $x_2$.

The uncertainty parameter is the transportation costs $\omega_k$. The value of this is not known to begin with.

#### Question 5.2
While not explicitly stated in the problem formulation I will assume that it is not an option to deliver less than all the 20 cars. Furthermore, it is assumed that there are not any more than the 20 cars to deliver, so more than 20 cannot be delivered. Thus, $x_1+x_2=20$.
$$
\begin{align}
\min_{x_1} & &35x_1 + \min_{x_2}\sum_{k=1}^{4} p_k \omega_k x_2 \\
s.t. & & \\
&&x_1≤12\\
&&x_1+x_2=20 \\
&&x_1≥0 \\
&&x_2≥0
\end{align}
$$

The general form of a SLP on deterministic equivalent form is 
$$
\begin{align}

\min_{\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}} \quad & \mathbf{c}^\top \mathbf{x} + \sum_{k=1}^K p_k \mathbf{d}_k^\top \mathbf{y}_k \nonumber\\

\text{s.t.} \quad & A \mathbf{x} = \mathbf{b} \nonumber \\

& T_k \mathbf{x} + W_k \mathbf{y}_k = \mathbf{h}_k & k=1,\ldots,K \nonumber \\

& \mathbf{x} \geq 0 \nonumber \\

& \mathbf{y}_k \geq 0, & k=1,\ldots,K \nonumber

\end{align}
$$
and when $W_k$ is not a function of $\omega_k$ it is a SLP with fixed recourse. In our case $W_k$, as denoted in the above equation, is just 1, for our 1-dimensional variables $x_1,x_2$, and thus our problem *is* a SLP with fixed recourse.

#### Question 5.3

In the expected value problem we first calculate the expected value of the uncertainty parameter, $\omega_k$, and then minimize our objective function. 

This gives rise to the following formulation:
$$
\begin{align}
\min_{x_1, x_2} & &35x_1 + \sum_{k=1}^{4} (p_k \omega_k) \cdot x_2 \\
s.t. & & \\
&&x_1≤12\\
&&x_1+x_2=20 \\
&&x_1≥0 \\
&&x_2≥0
\end{align}
$$
#### Question 5.4

From the fundamental ordering it is known that $EEV≥RP$.
Since this is a minimization objective, the objective function value of the stochastic linear program is better or as good as thee expected costs over all scenarios of the expected value solution.

## Problem 6
#### Question 6.1

We define the demand
$$
\omega\sim \mathcal{N}(40,12^2).
$$
We define the cost $c_1$ and $c_2$ for type 1 and 2 respectively
$$
c = \begin{bmatrix}c_1\\c_2\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}40\\65\end{bmatrix}.
$$
We define the number of hotdogs bought $x_1$ and $x_2$ for type 1 and 2 respectively
$$
x = \begin{bmatrix}x_1\\x_2\end{bmatrix}.
$$
In order for the supply of hotdogs to satisfy the demand the following must hold
$$
2x_1+x_2≥\omega,
$$
here keeping in mind that customers will buy either 2 of type 1 or one of type 2.

Since we want to satisfy demand with a certainty level of 95% we introduce the constraint $P[2x_1+x_2≥\omega]≥0.95$.

Obviously we cannot buy a negative amount of hotdogs and the amount bought must be a whole number.

Thus, the resulting chance-constrained problem can be written as

$$
\begin{align}
\min_x& &c^\top x \\
s.t. &&P[2x_1+x_2≥\omega]≥0.95 \\
&&x_1,x_2\in\mathbb{Z}_+
\end{align}
$$
#### Question 6.2
We define the CDF of $\omega$ as $F_\omega$.

We can then rewrite 
$$
P[2x_1+x_2≥\omega] = F_\omega(2x_1+x_2).
$$
Thus,
$$
\begin{align}
P[2x_1+x_2≥\omega]≥0.95&\Leftrightarrow  \\
F_\omega(2x_1+x_2)≥0.95&\Leftrightarrow  \\
2x_1+x_2≥F_\omega^{-1}(0.95)&
\end{align}
$$
The deterministic linear reformulation is 
$$
\begin{align}
\min_x& &c^\top x \\
s.t. &&2x_1+x_2≥F_\omega^{-1}(0.95) \\
&&x_1,x_2\in\mathbb{Z}_+
\end{align}
$$
