---
Uge: "3"
Pensum: "[[Chapter Markov chains.pdf]]"
Slides: "[[4. semester/Beslutninger under usikkerhed/Material/Slides/Uge 3.pdf]]"
Video: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/187810/Home
Dato: 13/2/24
---
## Classification of states

#### Class
A collection of states that communicates together.

#### Irreducible
A Markov chain is irreducible when it contains only one class.
#### Accessible
A state $j$ is accessible from $i$ if $p_{ij}^{(n)}$>0 for some $n≥0$.
A sufficient condition for *all* states to be accessible is that there exists a value of $n$ for which $p_{ij}^{(n)}>0$ for all $i$ and $j$.

#### Communicative
Two states $i$ and $j$ are said to communicate when $i$ is accessible from $j$ and $j$ is accessible from $i$.
1. Any state communicates with itself
2. If state $i$ communicates with $j$, then state $j$ communicates with $i$.
3. If state $i$ communicates with $j$, and state $j$ communicates with $k$, then state $i$ communicates with $k$.

#### Transient state
Upon entering this state, the process *might never return* to this state. Thus a state $i$ is transient when there exists a state $j$ that is accessible from $i$, but not vice versa, that is, $i$ is not accessible from $j$.
#### Recurrent state
Upon entering this state, the process *definitely* will return to this state. A state is recurrent when it is not transient. A recurrent state will be visited an infinite number of times.

#### Absorbing state
Upon entering this state, the process will never leave this state. A state is an absorbing state if and only if $p_{ij}=1$. Absorbing states are a specific type of recurrent state.

## Periodicity
#### Period of state $i$
The period $t$ is the smallest integer $t>1$ with the property that $p_{ij}^{(n)}=0, \forall n \notin \{t, 2t, 3t, \dots\}$

>[!example]+ Gambling example
>Starting in state 1, it is possible for the process to enter state $1$ only at times $2, 4, \dots$, so state 1 has period 2. 
>The reason is that the player can break even (be neither winning nor losing) only at times $2, 4, \dots$, which can be verified by calculating $p_{11}^{(n)}$ for all $n$ ant noting that $p_{11}^{(n)}=0$ for $n$ odd.
#### Aperiodic state
Has a period of 1. That is any process that has two consecutive integers $s, s+1$ such that it can be in this state at times $s$ and $s+1$.

#### Ergodic state
Recurrent state that are aperiodic in a finite state Markov chain.