---
Uge: "4"
Dato: 20/2/2024
Pensum: "[[Chapter Markov chains.pdf]]"
Slides: "[[4. semester/Beslutninger under usikkerhed/Material/Slides/Uge 4.pdf]]"
Video: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/187810/Home
---

>[!info] Expected average costs per unit time
>Let $C(X_t)$ define a cost funciton for the costs incured when visiting stat $X_t$ at time $t, t=0,1,\dots$.
>Expected costs for the first $n$ periods:
>$$
>E\left[ \frac{1}{n}\sum_{t=1}^{n} C(X_t) \,  \right] = \sum_{j=0}^{M} \pi_jC(j) \, 
>$$
>as
>$$
>\lim_{ n \to +\infty } \left( \frac{1}{n}\sum_{k=1}^{n} p_{ij}^{(k)} \,  \right)=\pi
>$$

>[!example]+ Expected average cost per unit time: Parking
>Parking lot, 3 spots, revenue of 20 DKK per timestep of 15 minutes. What is the expected revenue over 3 hours?
>$$
>P =
>\begin{bmatrix}0.2 & 0.8 & 0 & 0 \\
0.1 & 0.5 & 0.4 & 0 \\
0 & 0.1 & 0.6 & 0.3 \\
0 & 0 & 0.2 & 0.8\end{bmatrix}
>$$
>Method:
>+ First: calculate the steady state probabilities
>+ + See [[3.3 Steady State Probabilities]]
>+ Next: calculate the expected costs per unit time
>+ + $C = [0,20,40,60]$
>+ + $\sum_{j=0}^{M} \pi_jC(j) = \pi \times C \approx 48.54 \,$ 
>+ Finally: calculate the answer
>+ + 12 timesteps: $12 * 48.54 \approx 582.47$

## Expected average costs per unit time - complex cost function
Let:
1. $[X_t]$ be an irreducible (finite state) Markov chain
2. $D_t$ be i.i.d. random variables associated to this chain
3. For a fixed $m=0,\pm_1, \pm_2, \dots$, a cost $C(X_t, D_{t+m})$ is incurred at time $t, t=0,1,2,\dots$
4. The sequence $X_0, X_1, X_2, \dots, X_t$ must be independent of $D_{t+m}$

Then:
$$
\lim_{ n \to +\infty }E\left[ \frac{1}{n}\sum_{t=1}^{n} C(X_t, D_{t+m}) \,  \right]=\sum_{j=0}^{M} k(j)\pi_j \,  
$$
with: $k(j) = E[C(j, D_{t+m})]$
where the latter expectation is taken with respect to the probability dist. of the random variable $D_t$ given state $j.$
Furthermore, for essentially all paths of the process:
$$
\lim_{ n \to +\infty } \left[ \frac{1}{n}\sum_{t=1}^{M} C(X_t, D_{t+m}) \,  \right]\sum_{j=0}^{M} k(j)\pi_j \,
$$

>[!example]+ Complex cost function: Inventory management
>+ Holding costs of 10 DKK per week per item
>+ Ordering costs of 100 DKK fixed + 300 DKK per pair. We order three units every time: total ordering costs of 1000 DKK.
>+ A penalty costs of unsatisfied demand of 600 DKK per lost sales.
>We assume uniform demand for every week of 0,1,2,3 items.
>
>Calculate $k(j)=E[C(j, D_t)]$
>1. Calculate steady state probabilities
>	$\pi \approx [0.42, 0.25, 0.19, 0.14]$
>2. Calculate for every state $j$, over all possible values of $D_t=\{0,1,2,3\}$. Uniform distribution: probability is 0.25 for each outcome of demand.
>3. Calculate $E\left[ \frac{1}{n}\sum_{t=1}^{n} C(X_t) \, \right]=\sum_{j=0}^{M} \pi_jC(j) \,$ .



