---
Uge: "5"
Slides: "[[Uge 5.pdf]]"
Pensum: Kap 17.1-17.6 (- 17.4), Hillier and Lieberman, 9th ed.
Video: "[[https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/187810/Home]]"
Dato: 27/2/24
---
## Continuous time Markov processes

>[!info]+ Markovian property for continous case
>Let $t$ be a continuous time parameter, $t'≥0$.
>$X(t)$ is the state of the system at time $t'$.
>Transit points ($t_1, t_2$) are random points in time not necessarily integer.
>$$
>P(X(t+s)=j|X(s)=i \text{ and } X(r)=x(r))=P(X(t+s)=j|X(s)=i)),
>$$
>$\forall i,j=0,1,\dots,M, \forall r≥0,s>r,t>0$.
>
>**Stationary:**
>$$
>P(X(t+s)=j|X(s)=i)=P(X(t+s)=j|X(0)=i)),\forall s>0.
>$$
>
>**Transition time:**
>$$
>P(T_i>t+s|T_i>s)=P(T_i>t).
>$$
>The exponential distribution is the only continous distribution with this property.

#### Exponential distribution
- $f_T(t)$ is a strictly decreasing function of $t$.
- Lack of memory.
- The *minimum* of several independent exponential random variables has an exponential distribution.
- Unaffected by aggregation or disaggregation.

## A simple queue
**Basic structure of a queue** + most common assumptions
- **Arrival process**
	- Infinit population, Poisson arrival process, exponential interarrival time
- **Queue**
	- Infinite length
- **Queuing discipline**
	- First come first serve
- **Service mechanism**
	- Numbers of servers(1), exponential service time (holding time)

>[!info] Queueing terminology
>+ State of the system = # of customers *in the queuing system*
>+ Queue length = # of customers *waiting* for service to begin
>+ $N(t)$ = # of *customers in the queueing* system at time $t, t≥0$
>+ $s$ = # of *servers*
>+ $\lambda$ = mean *arrival rate*
>+ $\mu$ = mean *service rate*
>+ $\rho$ = utilization factor

>[!info] Little's formula
>The expected number of customers in the system $L$ (in the steady-state) equals the arrival time $\lambda$ multiplied by the expected waiting time for each individual customer.
>$$
>L = \lambda W
>$$
>**Additionally:**
>$$
>L_q=\lambda W_q
>$$
>$$
>W = W_q+\frac{1}{\mu}
>$$
>where 
>$L$ is $E(\text{n. of customers})$, 
>$L_q$ is $E(\text{queue length})$, 
>$W$ is waiting time in system, 
>$W_q$ is waiting time in queue.



