---
Dato: 8/10/2024
Slides: "[[week6.pdf]]"
Pensum: 9.1-9.2, (9.3)
Teaching Notes: "[[lesson6.pdf]]"
---
Queuing systems are classified according to
1. *The input process*, the probability distribution fo the pattern of the arrivals of customers in time
2. *The service distribution*, the probability distribution of the random time to serve a customer
3. *The queue discipline*, the number of servers and the order of customer service
We will always assume that the durations of service for individual customers are i.i.d nonnegative random variables, and are independent of the arrival process. The queue discipline is *first come, first served*.

Let
$$
\begin{align}
L & = \text{the average number of customers in the system} \\
\lambda & = \text{the rate of arrival of customers to the system} \\
W & = \text{the average time spent by a customer in the system}.
\end{align}
$$
Then, for a queueing system that has been operating sufficiently long to have reached an appropriate state, or a position of statistical equilibrium
$$
L = \lambda W.
$$
## Types of queueing systems
A standard shorthand, that assumes that the arrival times form a renewal process, is of the format
$$
A/B/c
$$
where
- $A$ describes the interarrival distribution,
- $B$ describes the individual customer service time distribution, and
- $c$ indicates the number of servers.

For the first two positions
- $G=GI$ denotes a general or arbitrary distribution,
- $M$ (memoryless) denotes the exponential distribution,
- $E_k$ (Erlang) denotes the gamma distribution of order $k$, and
- $D$ denotes a deterministic distribution, a schedule of arrivals or fixed service times.

Common queuing systems are
- $M/M/1$
	Arrivals follow a Poisson process; service times are exponentially distributed; and there is a single server. The number $X(t)$ of customers in the system at time t forms a birth and death process.
- $M/M/\infty$
	There are Poisson arrivals and exponentially distributed service times. Any number of customers are processed simultaneously and independently. Often self-service situations may be described by this model.
- $M/G/1$
	In this model, there are Poisson arrivals but arbitrarily distributed service times. The analysis proceeds with the help of an embedded Markov chain.

## The $M/M/1$ system
For the poisson arrival process we have
$$
\begin{align}
&Pr\left\{ \text{An arrival in [t,t+h[} \right\} =\lambda h+o(h) \\
&Pr\left\{ \text{No arrivals in [t,t+h[} \right\} =1-\lambda h+o(h).
\end{align}
$$
Similarly,
$$
\begin{align}
&Pr\left\{ \text{A service is completed in [t,t+h[} \right\} =\mu h+o(h) \\
&Pr\left\{ \text{Service not completed in [t,t+h[} \right\} =1-\mu h+o(h).
\end{align}
$$
A $M/M/1$ system $X(t)$ is a birth and death process with birth parameters
$$
\lambda_k=\lambda \text{ for } k=0,1,\dots
$$
and death parameters
$$
\mu_k=\mu \text{ for } k=1,2,\dots.
$$
Following the limiting equations from [[3.1 Birth and death processes]], when $\lambda<\mu$, the **queue length distribution** in equilibrium follows
$$
	\pi_0=1-\frac{\lambda}{\mu},\quad \pi_k=\pi_0\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^k=\left( 1-\frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^k \text{ for } k=0,1,\dots.
$$
The **mean queue length** in equilibrium is
$$
L=\frac{\lambda}{\mu-\lambda}.
$$
For $\lambda≥\mu$ $\sum_j\pi_j=\infty$ and no equilibrium distribution exists. As the *traffic intensity* $\rho=\frac{\lambda}{\mu}\to1$ the mean queue length $L=\frac{\rho}{1-\rho}$ becomes infinite.

The *server utilization* is $1-\pi_0=\frac{\lambda}{\mu}$.

The **waiting time distribution** for a $M/M/1$ queue is
$$
Pr\left\{ T≤t \right\} =1-e^{-t(\mu-\lambda)},
$$
where $T$ denotes the total waiting time of a newly arrived customer, and the **mean** of this exponential waiting time distribution is 
$$
W=\frac{1}{\mu-\lambda}.
$$
## The $M/M/\infty$ system
When an unlimited number of servers are always available, then all customers in the system at any instant are simultaneously being served.

Thus, we obtain the birth and death parameters
$$
\lambda_k=\lambda \text{ and } \mu_k=k\mu \text{ for } k=0,1,\dots.
$$
The **queue length distribution** is
$$
\pi_k=\frac{\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^k}{k!}e^{-\lambda/\mu}
$$
and the **mean queue length** in equilibrium is 
$$
L=\frac{\lambda}{\mu}.
$$
Since a customer in this system begins service immediately upon arrival, customer waiting time consists only of the **exponentially distributed service time**, and the **mean waiting time** is
$$
W=\frac{1}{\mu}.
$$
## The $M/M/s$ system
Here a fixed number $s$ of servers are available. The appropriate birth and death parameters are
$$
\lambda_k=\lambda \text{ for } k=1,2,\dots
$$
$$
\mu_k=\begin{cases}
k\mu & \text{ for } k=0,1,\dots,s, \\
s\mu & \text{ for } k>s.
\end{cases}
$$
If $X(t)$ is the number of customers in the system at time t, then the number undergoing service is $\min\{X(t), s\}$, and the number waiting for service is $\max\{X(t) − s, 0\}$. 

As with the $M/M/1$ system, as the traffic intensity $\rho=\frac{\lambda}{s\mu}\to 1$ the mean queue length becomes unbounded.

For $\lambda<s\mu$
$$
\pi_0=\left[ \sum_{j=0}^{s-1} \frac{1}{j!}\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^j+\frac{\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^s}{s!\left( 1-\frac{\lambda}{s\mu} \right)} \,  \right]^{-1}
$$
$$
\pi_k=\begin{cases}
\frac{1}{k!}\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^k\pi_0 & \text{ for } k=0,1,\dots,s, \\
\frac{1}{s!}\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^s\left( \frac{\lambda}{s\mu} \right)^{k-s}\pi_0 & \text{ for } k≥s.
\end{cases}
$$
The **mean waiting time** is 
$$
W = W_0+\frac{1}{\mu},\quad W_0=\frac{L_0}{\lambda},
$$
where $L_0$, the mean number of customers in the system waiting for, and not undergoing, service is
$$
L_0=\frac{\pi_0}{s!}\left( \frac{\lambda}{\mu} \right)^s \frac{\frac{\lambda}{s\mu}}{\left( 1-\frac{\lambda}{s\mu} \right)^2},
$$
and the **mean queue length** is
$$
L=\lambda W=\lambda\left( W_0+\frac{1}{\mu} \right)=L_0+\frac{\lambda}{\mu}.
$$

$$
$$

