---
Dato: 22/10/2024
Slides: "[[week7.pdf]]"
Teaching Notes: "[[lesson7.pdf]]"
Pensum: "[[phase–type distributions.pdf]]"
---
>[!info] Definition
>A discrete phase-type distribution is the distribution of the time to absorption in a finite discrete time Markov chain with transition matrix $P$ of dimension $m+1$
>$$
>P=\begin{bmatrix}S & s \\
>0 & 1\end{bmatrix}
>$$
>where, $S$ is a matrix, and $0$ and $s$ are vectors.
>
>The initial probability vector is denoted by $(\alpha, \alpha_{m_+1})$, where $\alpha$ is a vector. The pair $(\alpha,S)$ is called a representation for the phase-type distribution.

A **geometric distribution** expressed as a phase-type distribution
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}p & 1-p \\
0 & 1\end{bmatrix},
$$
$\alpha=(1)$.

A **negative binomial distribution** expressed as a phase-type distribution
$$
P=\begin{bmatrix}p & 1-p & 0  & 0& \cdots & 0 \\
0 & p & 1-p & 0  & \cdots & 0 \\
0 & 0 & p & 1-p & \cdots & 0 \\
\vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \vdots &  & \vdots \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & \cdots & 1-p \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & \cdots & 1\end{bmatrix}
$$
$\alpha=(1,0,\dots,0)$.

## Basic properties
Let $X$ denote the random variable of the time to absorption. Then
$$
Pr\left\{ X≤n \right\}=1-\alpha S^n1.
$$
The generating function for a discrete phase-type random variable is
$$
H(z)=\sum_{x=0}^{\infty} z^xf(x)=\alpha_{m+1}\sum_{x=1}^{\infty}z^x\alpha ^{x-1}s=\alpha_{m+1}+z\alpha(I-zS)^{-1}s = E[z^X],  \,  \, 
$$
where $I$ represents the identity matrix. Thus
$$
E[X] = \mu = \alpha(I-S)^{-1}1.
$$
For continuous variables
$$
Pr\left\{ X≤t \right\} =1-\alpha e^{St}1
$$
$$
H(z) = E[e^{-zX}]=\alpha_{p+1}+\alpha(zI-S)^{-1}s
$$
$$
E[X] = \mu=\alpha(-S)^{-1}1.
$$
In summary

|                       | Discrete case     | Continuous case    |
| --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------------ |
| Density               | $\alpha T^{x-1}t$ | $\alpha e^{Tx}t$   |
| Survival function     | $\alpha T^xe$     | $\alpha e^{Tx}e$   |
| Distribution function | $1-\alpha T^xe$   | $1-\alpha e^{Tx}e$ |


The matrix $U=(I-S)^{-1}$ is of special importance as the $i,j$'th element has a probabilistic interpretation as the expected time spent in state $j$ before absorption, conditioned on starting in state $i$. We can express the generating function using $U$ instead of $S$
$$
H(z)=\alpha_{m+1}+\alpha\left( U \frac{1-z}{z}+I \right)^{-1}1,\quad z>0.
$$
## Closure properties
Phase-type distributions are closed under a number of operations.
#### Sum of two independent PH variables
For two discrete random variables $X$ and $Y$ with representation $(\alpha,S)$ and $(\beta,T)$ respectively the random variable $Z=X+Y$ follows a discrete phase-type distribution with representation $(\gamma,L)$
$$
\begin{bmatrix}L & l \\
0 & 1\end{bmatrix}=
\begin{bmatrix}S & s\beta & \beta_{k+1}s \\
0 & T & t \\
0 & 0 & 1\end{bmatrix},
$$
$\gamma=(\alpha,\alpha_{m+1}\beta),\gamma_{m+k+1}=\alpha_{m+1}\beta_{k+1}.$

#### Finite mixtures of phase-type distributions
Given $k$ phase-type distributed random variables $X_i$ with representation $(\alpha_i,S_i)$ we have $Z=I_iX_i$ with $\sum_{i=1}^{k}I_i=1  \,$ and $Pr\left\{ I_i=1 \right\}=p_i$. The random variable $Z$ is itself phase-type distributed with representation $(\gamma,L)$ where
$$
L=\begin{bmatrix}S_1 & 0 & \cdots & 0 \\
0 & S_2 & \cdots & 0 \\
\vdots & \vdots & \vdots & v... \\
0 & 0 & \cdots & S_k\end{bmatrix}
$$
$\gamma=(p_1\alpha_1,p_2\alpha_2,\dots,p_k\alpha_k)$.

#### Order statistics
Consider the two random variables $X$ and $Y$ phase-type distributed with representation $(S_x,\alpha_x)$ and $(S_y,\alpha_y)$ respectively

Then $Z_{min}=\min(X,Y)$ is phase-type distributed with representation $(L,\gamma)$ such that
$$
L=S_x\otimes S_y, \gamma=\alpha_x\otimes \alpha_y.
$$
For the continuous case we have
$$
L=S_x\otimes I_y+I_x\otimes S_y.
$$
Further, $Z_{max}=max(X,Y)$ is phase-type distributed with representation $(L,\gamma)$ such that
$$
L=\begin{bmatrix}S_x\otimes S_y & S_x\otimes t_y & t_x\otimes S_y \\
0 & S_x & 0 \\
0 & 0 & S_y\end{bmatrix},
\gamma = (\alpha_x\otimes \alpha_y,\alpha_x\alpha_{y,m+1},\alpha_{x,k+1}\alpha_y).
$$
Here, the dimension of $S_x$ is $k$ and the dimension of $S_y$ is $m$ with
$$
l = \begin{bmatrix}t_x\otimes t_y \\
t_x \\
t_y\end{bmatrix}.
$$

In the continuous case:
$$L=\begin{bmatrix}S_x\otimes I_y+I_x\otimes S_y & I_x\otimes s_y & s_x\otimes I_y \\
0 & S_x & 0 \\
0 & 0 & S_y\end{bmatrix}, l = \begin{bmatrix}0 \\
s_x \\
s_y\end{bmatrix}$$
#### Other closure properties
We briefly mention that all discrete probability distribution functions with finite support (i.e. $f(x)=0$ for all $x \geq x_0$ ) are of phase-type.

Random sums of independent discrete phase-type variables where the number of terms in the random sum is itself phase-type distributed is phase type distributed with representation.

$$
(\alpha \otimes \beta,S\otimes I+s\alpha \otimes T).
$$

## Continuous phase-type distributions
Discrete and continuous phase-type distributions differ slightly in their time structure and representation: discrete distributions use stochastic transition matrices with matrix powers for cumulative probabilities, while continuous distributions rely on generator matrices with matrix exponentials. Additionally, discrete distributions use generating functions for moments, whereas continuous distributions apply the Laplace transform.

The generator matrix for the Markov jump process in the continuous case for a given representation is
$$
Q=\begin{bmatrix}S & s \\
0 & 0\end{bmatrix}.
$$
## Phase-type renewal process
A phase–type renewal process is a point process, were the distance between two points can be described by independent and identically distributed phase-type distributed random variables. The stationary version is of special interest. The age of the process at time t is defined to be the time since the last event - or point - while the residual life time at time t is the time to the next event - or point.

>[!info] Theorem
>In a stationary phase–type renewal process the distribution of age and residual life time are phase–type distributed with representation $(\pi,S)$ where
>$$
>\pi=\frac{\alpha U}{\alpha U1}.
>$$
>The moments of the residual life time distribution is given by
>$$
>\mu_i^*=i! \frac{\alpha U^{i+1}1}{\alpha U1}.
>$$

