---
Dato: 14/2/24
Uge: "3"
---
## Research design

#### Survey design:
- Cross-sectional design
- Repeated cross-sectionsal design
- Panel design

>[!example]+ How to examine the causal effect of one variable on another
>For example:
>+ Does it have a positive effect on job satisfaction to offer free coffee to employers?
>+ How to examine with a survey?
>
>Possible to fine a comparison group?
>+ Yes: Random assignmen possible?
>+ + Yes: **Experimental designs**
>+ + No: **Quasi-experimental designs**
>+ No: **Non-experimental designs**

#### Latent variables
Variables that are not directly measurable/observable (for example attitute)

Single questions used as *indicators*. Reliable measurements requires several indicators.

###### How to measure latent variables
Are reliable and valid scales to measure the latent construct available:
+ Yes:
	+ Use these scales – requires extensive testing to develop a valid and reliable scale
+ No:
	+ Look for similar scales in the literature (e.g. how are attitudes on a similar behavior measured) and revise.

#### Validity and reliability
###### Validity
Does your measure/test measure what it is supposed to measure?

###### Reliability
Is the measure accurate, consistent and stable?

## Survey design

Minimise cognitive load, so people have free capacity to think about the response.
 + Avoid too long and complicated questions
 + Avoid jargon, foreign/technical words
 + Use active rather than passive voice
 + Repeat nouns instead of using pronouns
 + Avoid negative formulations

#### Open-ended questions
**Open-ended questions**: Unexpected results - but something relevant for your evt. not considered

**Closed questions**: People focus on what you think is relevant

#### Social desirability bias (SD)
Tendency to respond in a way that makes respodents look good
To minimize SD:
+ Formulate questions clear and understandable so that people do not feel stupid
+ "Do you happen to know..."
+ Wording as neutral as possible (e.g. "Do you allow your children to ride without a helmet ~~even though you know that it increases their risk of injury?~~")


#### Question structure
+ Item batteries
+ "yes/no" checklists
+ "Choose all that apply" (CATA) checklists

###### Order
+ Order content **from general to specific**
+ Demographic question at **the end**
+ Randomize questions within batteries

## Politing 
#### Cognitive piloting
**Cognitive interview**: Ask interview partners to "think aloud" while answering, and/or each question is followed by additional questions

#### Quantitative piloting
If possible: do a pilot test with a population similar to the target population

**Item characteristics**: Ideally: normal distribution with a mean at the center of the rating scale, range should cover all possible answer categories.

**Scale characteristics**: Test if items meant to measure the same construct load on the same factor in a factor analysis, check internal consistency of items (Chronbach's alpha > 0.7).

**Revise after pilot test**: delete or reformulate itmes with a high number of missings, a very skew distribution or a low Chronbach's alpha

>[!info]- Chronbach's alpha
>$$
>\alpha = \frac{k}{k-1}\left( 1-\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{k} \sigma_{y_i} ^2\, }{\sigma_y ^2} \right),
>$$
>where:
>$k$ represents the number of items in the measure,
>$\sigma_{y_i} ^2$ the variance associated with each item $i$,
>$\sigma_y ^2$ the variance associated with the total scores $\left( y=\sum_{i=1}^{k} y_i \, \right)$.




 
